Question 5: What Happens When Duplicate IPs Are Configured in a Network?
When two devices have the same IP address, an IP conflict occurs, causing network issues.

Consequences of Duplicate IP Addresses:
Network Disruptions: Packets may not reach the intended device.

Intermittent Connectivity: Conflicting devices responding to ARP requests make traffic unstable.

Operating System Warnings:

Windows: "IP address conflict detected" message.

Linux/macOS: ARP messages or logs in system files.

DHCP Conflict Detection: A DHCP server may assign an IP already in use, causing rejection.

Switching Loops: Misconfigured networks with duplicate IPs on routers can create loops.

Security Risks: Attackers can use duplicate IPs to hijack network sessions.

Preventing and Resolving IP Conflicts:
Use DHCP for automatic IP assignment.

Enable conflict detection in the OS.

Check ARP tables (arp -a) for conflicts.

Avoid duplicate static IPs.

Renew IP leases (ipconfig /release && ipconfig /renew on Windows, dhclient -r && dhclient on Linux).

Question 7: How to Check If the Default Gateway Is Reachable?
The default gateway is a router that forwards traffic from the local network to other networks.

Steps to Check Connectivity:
Identify the Default Gateway:

Windows: ipconfig

Linux/macOS: ifconfig or ip route

Ping the Gateway:

ping <gateway-IP>

A successful response confirms connectivity.

Trace the Route to the Gateway:

Windows: tracert <gateway-IP>

Linux/macOS: traceroute <gateway-IP>

Check the ARP Table:

arp -a

If the gateway’s MAC address is missing or incorrect, there may be an ARP issue.

Question 8: Understanding Network Interfaces
ifconfig (Interface Configuration)
Displays network interfaces and configurations.

ifconfig -a lists all interfaces.

Shows IP address, subnet mask, MAC address, MTU, and packet statistics.

iwconfig (Wireless Network Configuration)
Used for Wi-Fi interfaces.

iwconfig wlan0 shows SSID, mode, frequency, signal strength, and bitrate.

Question 10: How Does a DHCP Server Assign IP Addresses?
DHCP (Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol) automatically assigns IP addresses and network settings.

DHCP Process (DORA):
Discovery: The client broadcasts a request for an IP.

Offer: The server responds with an available IP.

Request: The client confirms it wants the offered IP.

Acknowledgment: The server assigns the IP.

Checking DHCP Configuration:
Windows: ipconfig /all

Linux/macOS: dhclient -v

IP Assignment Types:
Static IP: Manually assigned (used for servers and printers).

Dynamic IP: Automatically assigned by DHCP with an expiration time.

Reserved IP: A DHCP server always assigns the same IP to a specific device.

Common DHCP Issues:
IP Exhaustion: No available IPs left in the DHCP pool.

Lease Expiration: Device loses its IP and needs renewal.

DHCP Server Unreachable: Devices fail to get an IP.